---
title: Facilitators' Instructions for "Considering the Whole Self in Teaching and Learning"
---

### Layout

This workshop is structured as a "Learning Community" split
between two synchronous sessions. Asynchronous prep modules are
designed to enrich the synchronous sessions. The rest of this page
will detail how we implemented the workshop, but feel free to
adapt to your purposes.

### Intro & instruction email

We sent the following email out to all registrants:

"Welcome to the Learning Community, Considering the Whole Self in
Teaching and Learning: Mental and Physical Wellbeing in the Classroom!
We are really looking forward to seeing you all at `DATE OF WORKSHOP
PART 1`
at `LOCATION` (e.g., Zoom), and we wanted to reach out about some prep
for our first get-together:

- Please work through the content in [Module
  1](../workshop/module1.html). This module provides the necessary
  foundation for our discussion-packed Zoom session, allows us to
  shorten the Zoom session (limiting Zoom fatigue), and also jump
  starts community building with an asynchronous discussion board. We
  really hope everyone is able to get a chance to engage with all the
  asynchronous material, but if for whatever reason you are not able
  to complete everything, we still encourage you to post to the
  discussion board and attend the in-person session on `DATE OF
  WORKSHOP`. Everyone has valuable perspective and expertise to bring
  to our discussions, and while the material will help enrich the
  discussion, we do not want to limit anyone’s participation because
  of a scarcity of time or mental bandwidth.

This session is part of a two-part Learning Community, and the
Learning Community is greater than the sum of its parts. Attendance
across both sessions yields a much richer experience, while also
putting the “community” in “Learning Community.”  If you have not had
a chance, you can register for the highly recommended second session
at: `REGISTRATION URL`.

In the meantime, if you have any questions or concerns please don’t
hesitate to reach out (`FACILITATORS' EMAIL`)."

### Synchronous Session 1

Slides are available
[here](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1i0MdAA8_09FReCYdzoS96aGH5MNhLyhX1MCIoB4OF_k/edit?usp=sharing)
(TODO: move presentation to reveal.js?); but most of session focuses
around discussion and the collaborative document available
[here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1MNI5cris19PANJOVwfO1ulTDXVTP5QNcTBtEP239o5M/edit?usp=sharing).

Here is the breakdown of the session, which is about 75 minutes long:

- :00 - :05 INTRODUCTIONS [Slides 1–3]

  Allow people to settle in before giving a very brief introduction:
   - Names and motivation for learning community (Slide 1)
   - The learning community → talk about holistic wellbeing and
   resist “banking model” of education (Slide 1)
   - Community agreement/discussion guidelines  → preferred camera
   on, can participate w/ chat or by speaking (Slide 2)
   - Guiding questions (Slide 3)

- :05 - :10 WARM UP [Slide 4]

  Physical check-in (breath and awareness). Can be any activity, but a
  sample script that we used is available here (TODO: link to script).

- :10 - :15 FRAME BOTH WORKSHOPS

  Presentation: data on mental health in higher education as evidence
  that lack of wellbeing is an issue (Slide 5). hooks' quotation as an
  ideal we are aiming for that can improve wellbeing (Slide 6).

	- Remind participants of what they read in the asynchronous
      modules, frame that they will be using that material in their
      workshops
    - Frame that we will not come into the breakout rooms unless
      invited with the "help" button—we’ll monitor how the discussion
      is progressing based on what you put in the shared doc.
	- We have two main collaborative sessions that we want to get to
      today: one is this visioning exercise, one is a concrete
      application of some principles to the question of assessment in
      the classroom.
    - Introduce visioning exercise (Slide 7). We’ll try to recall
      everyone around 3:15 (3:20) to amplify and share out from the
      visioning exercise
	- Provide recommendation for incorporating the collaborative doc
      into the discussion: take the first 10 minutes or so for
      introductions and the start of the discussion without worrying
      about adding to the document, then consider having one person
      from the group add salient points to the discussion as it
      continues.
    - The instructions for each activity are also visible on the
      collaborative document. You should be receiving a breakout room
      invitations right now.

- :15 - :35 SMALL GROUP VISIONING EXERCISE

	Facilitated discussion of asynchronous reading and reflection activities (small group and share out or full group, depending on numbers)
	  - hooks' quotation  → visioning exercise: what does a classroom that respects and cares for the souls of teachers and learners look like?
        - Participants discuss in small groups and contribute to collaborative document.

- :35 - :40 SHARE OUT

	Bring everyone back together and amplify a couple of entries from
    the colalborative doc before presenting the [TITL
    handout](https://traumainformedteachingblog.files.wordpress.com/2020/03/examples-of-titl-in-college-classrooms-3.2020-color-3.pdf)
    (Slide 8) and introducing the assesment exercise (screen share
    collaborative document).


- :40 - 1:00 CASE STUDIES: ASSESSMENT WORKSHOP

	Case studies in group work (re-thinking assessment). Discuss a common assessment. What is the:
      1. purpose of the assessment
      2. ideal path to fulfilling the purpose
      3. reality: within current roles how can we intervene to improve
         assessment for student and teacher mental health.

- 1:00 - 1:05 AMPLIFY AND SHARE OUT
   - Definitely amplify from third column of #2
   - (Time allowing) Ask if anyone wants to elaborate on their entries
     on the shared doc.

- 1:05-1:15

  Community feedback and input for next session:

  - Solicit feedback on first session (Slide 9)
    - In light of the guiding questions, rank which modules were most
      rewarding on Poll Everywhere (or any other survey software.
    - (time allowing) type some of your personal answers to the
      Session 1 guiding questions in the chat.
  - (time allowing) Start brainstorming for session 2 (Slide 10)
    - What are some questions people have about embodied learning?
    - (time allowing) solicit responses in chat
    - (otherwise) provide this as a “take home” prompt for discussion on Session 2’s async message board

### Instruction email between synchronous session 1 and 2

We wrote:

"To those that attended `DAY OF WORKSHOP PART 1`’s Learning Community:
thank you again for such an engaging and enriching session. Here is a
link to the collaborative document with all of the beautiful insights
generated from that session:

https://docs.google.com/document/d/1r70_NKg9sB-2qWH9hNwp5B_1jlcLh0bGJmRba5s5OOQ/edit?usp=sharing

To those that could not make it but are joining us for the second
session on `DATE OF WORKSHOP PART 2` - welcome! We are really looking
forward to `DAY OF WORKSHOP PART 2` and exploring the possibilities of
embodied pedagogy in the classroom! A few points before next session:

- We designed [Module 2](../workshop/module2.html) to enrich next `DAY OF WORKSHOP PART 2`’s
  discussion, and we hope you are able to work through the content
  before we meet. However, none of it is required and the overview
  page provides instructions on which activities we recommend
  prioritizing if you are too busy and/or stressed to engage with
  everything.

- The Zoom link will be sent out next week. In order to receive the
  zoom link please make sure to register for the second session if you
  have not done so already: `REGISTRATION URL`.

- We noticed that some of you mentioned past experience with “warm up”
  exercises like the one that Abby led on Wednesday. If any of you are
  interested in leading next Wednesday’s 5-minute warm up exercise,
  please reach out to Abby or Adam. We’d be thrilled to open up the
  floor!

In the meantime, if you have any questions or concerns please don’t
hesitate to reach out (`FACILITATORS' EMAIL`).

Most importantly, have a great weekend!"

### Synchronous Session 2

Slides are available
[here](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/18Lf84GyLN25YLRS9JE1kJZlDDISJZnZ_UeYsSb0g8YE/edit?usp=sharing)
(TODO: move presentation to reveal.js?); but most of session focuses
around discussion and the collaborative document available
[here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/10Kguon2fR8t5W1ILTJdXRxIScIaJ9GrUkJHxeQkuUeQ/edit?usp=sharing).

Here is the breakdown of the session, which is about 75 minutes long:

- :00 - :05

   Intro, discussion guidelines. (Slides 1-2)

- :05 - :10

  Physical check-in (breath and awareness). Can be any activity, but a
  sample script that we used is available here (TODO: link to
  script). (Slide 3)


- :10 - :15

  Guiding questions (Slide 4), agenda (Slide 5, & intro to principles
  exercise (screen share collaborative doc). (let them know to come
  back to the main room if they are feeling done with the principles
  exercise)

- :15 - :35

  Principles exercise: group work in collaborative document.

- :35 - :45

  Discuss and share out from group work. One slide on things
  to consider when applying embodied pedagogy (Slide 6). Introduce
  next group activity (screen share collaborative doc).

- 45 - 1:05

  Group workshops: re-design a learning objective activity to consider
  the body (collaborative document).

- 1:05 - 1:15

  Share out from re-design activity, goodbyes, and survey.

### Follow up email

The following email was sent to wrap up the learning community:

"Thank you all so much for your participation in this learning
community. It was a true pleasure working with and learning from
everyone. Below, please find the links to the two collaborative
documents we worked with for your reference.

- [Session 1](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1MNI5cris19PANJOVwfO1ulTDXVTP5QNcTBtEP239o5M/edit?usp=sharing)

- [Session 2](https://docs.google.com/document/d/10Kguon2fR8t5W1ILTJdXRxIScIaJ9GrUkJHxeQkuUeQ/edit?usp=sharing)

And, if you didn't get a chance, please take a moment to give us your
feedback on this learning community by filling out this survey `INSERT
LINK TO FEEDBACK SURVEY`.

We also welcome more detailed feedback, if you care to share it, via
email at `FACILITATORS' EMAIL`.

Many thanks and see you soon!"
